METHODS

ELLA cytokine test
The ELLA platform is a rapid cytokine detection system based on four parallel singleplex microfluidics ELISA assays run in triplicate within cartridges following manufacturer’s instructions. We first validated IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-a detection by ELLA at the Mount Sinai Human Immune Monitoring Center using plasma from multiple myeloma patients undergoing immunotherapies such as CAR-T cells and bispecific antibodies, known to elicit cytokine release storm. Analytical validation (Supplementary Figure 1A-C) was performed using both reference cytokine controls and biological replicates across different lots of cartridges, the reproducibility was >95%, with an intra-assay CV of 0.8%, and an inter-assay CV of 0.4-0.8% for analytes in the high detection range (>250 pg/mL), and a CV of 2.6-4.2% for analytes in the lowest detection range (5-50 pg/mL). Serum and plasma appear to be equivalent for detection of these cytokines. In March 2020, as the number of COVID-19 cases was increasing in New York City, we transferred the ELLA methodology to the Mount Sinai Hospital Center for Clinical Laboratories, which allowed the ELLA cytokine test to be coded into our electronic health record ordering system as part of a COVID-19 diagnostic panel.

Patient information and data source
This study was reviewed and approved by the Mount Sinai Institutional Review Board. A waiver of informed consent was obtained to query the patient electronic medical record. Samples for the RT-PCR SARS-CoV-2 lab test were collected via nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal swab at one of 53 different Mount Sinai locations, representing outpatient, urgent care, emergency and inpatient facilities. Blood specimen for ELLA were collected via venipuncture within the MSHS. All specimen and imaging were collected as part of standard of care.
Between March 21 and April 28, 1,484 patients hospitalized with suspicion of COVID-19 were tested for SARS-CoV-2 viral infection status by PCR and for the ELLA cytokine panel, and we obtained routine laboratory measurements, blood counts, and as part of their medical care. Patients were identified by querying the pathology department electronic database for individuals with both SARS-CoV-2 PCR-based testing and ELLA cytokine panel. Cytokine data was obtained from pathology department electronic databases and clinical and demographic data was supplemented with information from the Mount Sinai Data Warehouse, obtained from EPIC electronic medical records (Verona, WI). Clinical follow-up data was collected up to May 7, 2020.
Two investigators (D.M.D.V. and S.G.) independently compiled all clinical and laboratory information from these various sources, and compared them with near total matches. Differences were adjudicated based on individual patient chart review, and were explained by either missing or updated information from the data warehouse.

Variables
Our dataset included 3 broad classes of variables: (1) demographic variables (age, sex, race, ethnicity and smoking status); (2) clinical variables for each day of hospital encounter (body mass index (BMI), heart rate, temperature, respiratory rate, oxygen (O2) saturation, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, admission status, discharge status, and deaths; and (3) comorbid conditions (chronic kidney disease (CKD), asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), hypertension, obesity, diabetes, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), sleep apnea, and cancer). All 3 categories were obtained from the patients’ electronic medical record with comorbid conditions defined as an active ICD code and vital signs recorded for each patient's given encounter.

Determining COVID-19 Disease Severity
A severity scale for COVID-19 was devised by pulmonologists at Mount Sinai based on literature21 and clinical practice, which defined categories as follows: 1) mild/moderate COVID-19, based on normal/abnormal (<94%) oxygen saturation, respectively, or pneumonia on imaging; 2) severe COVID-19, based on use of high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC), non-rebreather mask (NRB), bilevel positive airway pressure (BIPAP) or mechanical ventilation, and no vasopressor use, and based on creatinine clearance (CrCl) >30 and ALT < 5x upper limit of normal; and 3) Severe COVID-19 with end organ damage, based on use of HFNC, NRB, BIPAP or mechanical ventilation with use of vasopressors, or based on CrCl <30, new renal replacement therapy (hemodialysis/continuous veno-venous hemofiltration) or ALT > 5x ULN. Clinical notes and imaging reports were reviewed in effort to establish the patient’s COVID-19 disease severity over time. Using a bag-of-words approach to vectorize both clinical notes and image reports, vectors were derived from the chest x-ray imaging report, in order to reflect the presence of viral pneumonia and worsening respiratory symptoms. Intubation status and oxygen therapy modality were obtaining by examining the patient clinical notes. The use of endotracheal tube, bilevel positive airway pressure, continuous positive air pressure, high-flow nasal cannula, mechanical ventilator, and/or supplemental oxygen greater than FiO2 70% was associated with severe COVID-19. End organ damage was defined by an alanine aminotransferase level of greater than five times the upper limit of normal, creatinine clearance less than 30, use of vasopressors, and/or new renal replacement therapy.

Sample size and power consideration:
The primary endpoint is the hazard ratio of death between the high and low levels of the cytokines (TNF-a, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-1b). We tested the hypothesis for H0: HRTNF-a=HRIL-6=HRIL-8=HRIL-1b=1 against Ha: any HR≠1. In this study, the event of interest is death. A two-sided log-rank test with an overall sample size of 674 patients (337 in each group) achieves 80% power at a 0.05 type I error to detect a hazard ratio of 2.29 when the proportion of death in the low group is 20%. The study lasted for 40 days with an accrual time of 30 days and a median follow-up time of 9 days. The proportion of patients who are still in the hospital during the study period is 10%. The sample size calculation was conducted using PASS software. The primary analyses assessed the impact of the cytokine levels after adjusting for patients’ demographics and comorbidities. The patients eligible for further analyses were those with cytokine tests on the date or before the date of last follow-up (n=1,298), which ensured the power ≥ 80% to test the primary hypothesis after adjusting for the covariates. Approximately 5% of patients had missing values in baseline demographics and comorbidities, and the cohort with complete cases was used for the primary analyses. The secondary analyses assessed the impact of the cytokines on the event of death after further adjusting for the clinical severity metrics. The analysis procedures were described in the statistical analysis section.

Statistical analysis
Patients’ characteristics were summarized using the standard descriptive statistics: median /interquartile range (IQR) for continuous variable, and count/percent for categorical variables. Distributions of the cytokine values were assessed and log-2 transformed to render the parametric statistical analyses. The cytokines were then categorized at the level of 70 pg/mL, 50 pg/mL, 35 pg/mL, 0.5 pg/mL, 100 mg/L, 1,000 μg/L, and 1 mg/L for IL-6, IL-8, TNF-a, IL-1b, CRP, ferritin, and D-dimer, respectively. These stringent cutoffs for cytokines were decided based on the median distribution within COVID-19 samples, while those for elevated inflammatory markers were based on 2-3x the upper limit of normal detection. The univariate analyses assessed the association of the cytokines and laboratory tests with patients’ characteristics using Mann- Whitney U test, Kruskal Wallis test and Spearman’s rank correlation test as appropriate. Additionally, Deming regressions and Spearman correlation coefficients were calculated for correlations between the cytokines and laboratory tests. We used multivariable linear regression models to test the association of the cytokine values with patients’ demographics and comorbidities22. The Kaplan-Meier plots along with the log-rank test were conducted to assess the differences in survival probabilities between the high and low levels of each cytokine across the follow-up time frame, which was calculated from the date of cytokine testing to date of death, discharge or end of follow-up period as appropriate23. The Cox Proportional Hazard Model was used to estimate the hazard of death adjusting for the covariates (e.g., patients’ demographics, comorbidities, laboratory test results), which were determined by the backward elimination method24,25. We assessed the survival model, censoring patients discharged alive and in hospitals. The competing risk model, in which death was the event of interest, the live discharge was the competing event, and inpatients were censored26,27, was also fitted as a sensitivity analysis. The predicted survival probabilities and cumulative incidence curves were provided. The analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 8.4.2., SAS 9.4, and R v.3.6.3.